# 2009-08-25

## 1

Preparing for the Worst 做好准备，迎接最糟 by </expert/archive/richricher/robert-kiyosaki/1>Robert Kiyosaki 文：罗伯特清崎  翻译：机械化研究所

Posted on Monday, August 24, 2009, 12:00AM

"Is the crisis over?" is a question I am often asked. "Is the economy coming back?" “这场危机已经结束了吗？” 这是我经常被问到的一个问题。“经济正在恢复吗？” My reply is, "I don't think so. I would prepare for the worst." 我的回答是：“我不这么人为，我将为最糟的情况做准备”

Like most people, I wish for a better future for all of us. Life is better when people are working, happy, and spending money. 像大多数人一样，我希望我们能有一个更好的未来。人们在工作，HAPPY，花钱，生活总是美好的。

The stock market has been going up since March 9, 2009. Talk of "green shoots" fill the air. Yet, in spite of the more positive news, I continue to recommend that people prepare for the worst. The following are some of my reasons: 股票市场从2009年3月9号以来已经逐步回升。空气中充斥了关于“绿芽再生”的讨论。当然，尽管有越来越多的好消息，但我继续建议人们，要为最糟的局面最好准备。下边是我的一些原因

1. I believe the stock market is being manipulated. I suspect the government, banks, and Wall Street are doing everything they can to keep the market from crashing. Our leaders know that nothing makes the world feel better than a raging bull market. 1、我相信股票市场是在被操纵的。我怀疑政府，银行，华尔街正在做他们能做的一起来阻止市场崩溃。我们的领导人相信没有什么比一个猛烈的牛市更能使广大人民群众感到情绪稳定了。

Do I have any proof that the market is being manipulated? No. I just smell a rat, or a pack of rats. I believe greed, self-interest, arrogance, and fear control the financial markets. I suspect those in charge will do anything to keep us all from panicking... and I don't blame them. A global panic would be ugly and dangerous. 我可以提供一些市场正在被操纵的证据吗？不，我只是闻到一些不妙的味道。我相信贪婪，私利，自大和恐惧正在控制着金融市场。我相信管理层会做任何事情来阻止我们陷入恐慌..，在这一点上，我并不责怪他们

2. In my view, this global crisis has been caused by the Federal Reserve Bank, the U.S. Treasury, Wall Street, and the central banks of the world. They caused the problem, profited excessively in doing so, and now profit by being asked to fix the problem. Every time I hear a politician mention the word stimulus, my mind flashes back to high school biology class, when I touched battery wires to a dead frog to make it twitch. Today, you and I are the dead frogs. Pretty soon the dead frog will be fried frog.

In the 1980s, our government's hot money stimulus was measured only in the millions of dollars. By the 1990s, the government had to ramp the stimulus voltage into the billions in order to get the frog to twitch. Today the frog has jumper cables with trillions in high-voltage hot money pouring through the lines.

While most us feel better when we have more high-voltage money in our hands, none of us feel good about higher taxes, increasing national debt, and rising inflation for the long term. Another old saying goes, "Sometimes the cure is worse than the disease." I say the government stimulus cure is killing us frogs.

3. Old frogs don't hop. Another reason I am cautious about the future is that the Western world has a growing number of old frogs. Between 1970 and 2000, the economy responded to bailouts and stimulus packages because the baby boomers of the world were entering their greatest earning years -- their purchasing power increased, and demand for homes, cars, refrigerators, computers, and TVs boosted the economy.

The stimulus plans seemed to work. But when a person turns 60, their spending habits change dramatically. They stop consuming and start conserving like a bear preparing for winter. The economy of the Western world is heading into winter. Hot wires and hot money will not get old frogs to hop. Old frogs will simply join the bears and stick that money in the bank as they prepare for the long, hard winter known as old age. The businesses that will do well in a winter economy are drug companies, hospitals, wheelchair manufacturers, and mortuaries.

4. The dying frog economy will lead us to the biggest Ponzi schemes of all: Social Security and Medicare. If we think this subprime financial crisis is big, it's my opinion that this crisis will be dwarfed by the crisis brewing in Social Security and Medicare...Medicare being the biggest crisis of all. As old frogs head for the big lily pad in the sky, they will demand young frogs spend even more in tax dollars just to keep old frogs from croaking.

5. The 401(k)Ponzi scheme. A Ponzi scheme, like the scheme Madoff ran, depends upon young money to pay off old money. In other words, a Ponzi scheme needs tadpoles to finance old frogs. The same is true for the 401(k) and other retirement plans to work. If young money does not come into the stock market, the old money cannot retire.

One reason so many people my age are worried, not only about Social Security and Medicare, is because they're concerned about getting their money out of the stock market before the other old frogs decide to drain the swamp. The facts are that the 401(k) plan has a trigger that requires old frogs to begin withdrawing their money at a certain age. In other words, as baby boomers grow older, more and more will be required, by law, to begin withdrawing their money from the market.

You do not have to be a rocket scientist to know that it is hard for a market to keep going up when more and more people are getting out. The reason the 401(k) has this law related to mandatory withdrawals is because the Federal government wants to collect the taxes that they deferred when the worker's money went into the plan. In other words, the taxman wants their pound of flesh. Since they allowed the worker to invest without paying taxes, the government wants their tax dollars when the employee retires. That is why the laws require older workers to sell their shares -- and pay their pound of flesh.

Demographics show that we are entering a battle between young and old. I call it the "Age War." The young want to hang onto their money to grow their families, businesses, and wealth. The old want the tax and investment dollars of the young to sustain their old age. This war is not coming...it is upon us now. This is one of many reasons why I remain cautious and say, "The worst is yet to come."




