# 2024-07-25

## 1

做空竞赛比赛思维，更多体验生活发现自我

继续读后感和考察后总结。

个人在经济社会发展趋于平稳的新环境下，如果还继续不分昼夜工作，不知疲倦学习，与过去几十年不同，反而会增加社会的人力资本的无效供给，加大生产要素的供给过剩。俗称，996。

一些年轻人在上班和上学之间选择了上香，退出了劳动力市场，主动做空、甚至是清空了自己的人力资本供给。这当然是一种损失。但是，作为对过剩的劳动供给的必要反馈，这也至少揭示了一种转变的到来。

他们不想去上辈和上一波人做同质化的劳动竞争和人力资本投放。他们不想卷了。卷也卷不过，卷过了也没什么价值。

从佛系到躺平再到上香和全职儿女，这是短期的就业状态的反应，也是中期趋势的征象。

该学的，70后、80后，乃至90后，都替他们学过了。前辈们学得太快，以至于00后的知识和技能，相比学长们并没有显著的提升，而这些人依然占据和争夺着有限的业务位置。所以，既不能得，不如后撤。

这种后撤，在一些人那里，就是真的撤出了战场，在另一些人那里，则是还有可能从新的方向再出发。这些新方向的创造，将会在00后、10后手中，诞生一些全新的行业和赛道。

对前一群人，一份简单的零工，加上家庭的支持，体验生活，享受生活，在合理的低预期下，也能过上快活的日子。

以前，学习没那么好、甚至动手能力没那么强的人，也能跟着时代大潮，找到工作，养活家庭。以后，同理，没什么稳定工作、没多少资产积累的人，也能跟着新的时代趋势，获得保障，在城市里过起来，体会普通生活的简单美好。

对后一群人，可能是一小群，他们足够的幸运，可以发现自己的兴趣爱好、特长特点，恰好可以塑形一个新的细分行业，他们会推动新的产品、服务或内容，添加到人类现代文明的生活的项目清单中。

这种塑形，对于本已成熟且丰富的现代城市生活来说，当然不会是变革性的，而主要是渐进式的。

该奋斗该追赶的行业，前辈们已经做过了。新的行业，从定义上，本来就是少的。即使还有强烈个人意志的人，也需要对未来的社会发展态势，建立合理的低期待。

所以，减少对与人比赛的关注，可以比赛的地方，都基本上比过了，还在比的地方，多数人也无从下手。

所以，增加对个人特点的认识，发现自己，发掘自己，至少过上普通但实则也极为丰富的中国式现代城市生活，在幸运眷顾的时候，可以参与形成和主动创造若干新的赛道和行业。

对于我们学长学姐来说，看着00后如特种兵旅游，去庙里拜佛，去博物馆人挤人的打卡，不必心痛，恨其不争，反而应该放下。

我反复说过，从现在到以后，培育一个身心健康、不抑郁、会享受日常工作学习休闲生活的人，就已经胜过无数人了。

发展的目的是为了好好生活，而不是相反。快速发展，已经以人类前所未见、甚至空前绝后的速度改善了生活。从现在到以后，生活的变化会慢下来，将来还会更慢。如何在一个慢时代里过上好生活，这是一个新课题。

这是70后、80后并不熟悉的课题。我当然会将探索新一种现代城市生活的希望，寄托于00后、10后。也希望你跟我做一样的期待。

## 2

分享 GitHub 上一份对《给每个人的线性代数》书籍的图解笔记 The-Art-of-Linear-Algebra。

通过对书籍中介绍的矩阵的重要概念进行可视化图释，以帮助大家从矩阵分解的角度对向量、矩阵计算和算法的理解，提供中英日三种语言笔记。

GitHub：github.com/kenjihiranabe/The-Art-of-Linear-Algebra

书籍《给每个人的线性代数》是来自麻省理工的一位数学教授 Gilbert Strang 编写，书籍英文名为 “Linear Algebra for Everyone”。

教授采用循序渐进的教学方式，从简单的概念到线性代数的核心概念，包括向量和矩阵的基本运算、线性方程组及其解法、向量空间和子空间等，并以通俗易懂的语言进行讲解。

对线性代数感兴趣的同学可以看看。

书籍：math.mit.edu/~gs/everyone/everyone_prefaceTOC01.pdf

## 3

Trump's Speeches Are Helping People Learn English. Really

In Facebook groups sharing posts focusing on language learning, early English students are turning to Trump-speak to learn basic vocabulary and concepts.

WE’VE GOT SOMETHING bigly to tell you. It’s a ‘uge thing. The best thing. The most important thing you’ll hear all year. Here it is: Trump’s language—all the middle-school-level vocabulary and grammar of it—is actually serving a greater purpose. It’s helping early English learners grasp this country’s complicated language.

Though his speeches may be hard to translate into foreign languages, listening to Trump and reading his subtitles can actually be a boon for people learning English as a second language, due to his low-level vocabulary, constant word repetition, and discussion of basic concepts. And across Facebook groups sharing posts focusing on language learning and linguistics, early learners are turning to Trump-speak to learn basic vocabulary and concepts.

The trend emerged back in February, when a post in the Polyglots group## 4a collection of Facebookers who love language and discuss linguistics## 5shared a piece from Good about Japanese translators struggling to parse Trump’s speech. Commenters chimed in, noting that early language learners could benefit from the listening practice. He “uses low-level vocabulary, and he often repeats himself, and he only talks about simple ideas,” wrote Rob Mallory, an English teacher in South Korea.

Members of other language groups feel the same way. Nika Nemsitsveridze, a native Georgian speaker who’s been learning English for about three years, is a member of Silly Linguistics, a Facebook group for language-related humor that often discusses Trump and the intricacies of his language. He finds the repetition in Trump’s speech helps him master smaller words and colloquial turns of phrase, a pattern he noticed while watching Trump on television, particularly during his inauguration speech.

“It's really easy for me to imitate Trump's speech,” he says, noting some of his favorite phrases: “make America great again,” “so sad,” and “so huge.” And linguists have a pretty good idea why that's so. “What learners are finding helpful is Trump's relatively slower speech and his use of repetition,” says Derek Denis, a linguist at the University of Toronto Mississauga. “These are both beneficial for learners of English because they provide more time to parse the speech stream, helping with comprehension." Trump's relatively small vocabulary helps, too, says Denis. "The fewer unfamiliar words, the better the comprehension.”

Even the lack of clarity in Trump’s speech can be helpful to learners. Heba Daraghme, another Silly Linguistics member whose first language is Arabic, is currently taking a course on pragmatics—the branch of linguistics exploring contextual implications of language—and she finds Trump’s conversations with others helpful. “I benefit from the way he utters his words unclearly and in an ambiguous way,” she says, referring to a discussion with Netanyahu about US-Israel relations in which the meaning of Trump’s words shifted depending on context. “I’d like to see you hold back on settlements for a little bit,” Trump said at the time. Depending on who you ask, Trump did or did not make a policy statement## 6he could have been making a simple suggestion or outright telling Netanyahu to stop.

It's important to note that English learners further along in their studies have less to gain from listening to Trump, or reading his often confusing English subtitles. For this reason, no formal program employs Trump’s language as a learning tool. Most linguists are uncomfortable with the idea of early learners turning to Trump-speak as an aid for their studies—to the point that some refuse to be connected to him at all, and some deny what the learners tell them are his benefits.

“A more advanced English language learner, who has relatively good fluency and a good vocabulary, might not be getting the same benefit out of [Trump’s] speeches,” says Denis. “A major learning goal for advanced learners is to grow their vocabulary, so new words and phrases are welcomed”—something Trump decidedly does not introduce into his speeches, which are often unscripted.

Denis also suggests a lack of style-shifting in Trump’s language## 7the ability to change speech patterns depending on who we’re speaking to## 8might hinder more advanced learners from picking up useful lessons. (Denis uses the example of a formal job interview versus a casual time out with friends). And though early learners can find comprehension in Trump’s repetitive and simple language, advanced learners and native speakers are often confused by his rambling, tangential style, another reason linguists say Trump might not be the best learning tool.

“When speaking off the cuff, he seems to lack cohesion, jumping or circling from one topic to the next and often mistakenly assuming a shared context with his audience,” says Georgetown University Department of Linguistics linguist Luke Plonsky. “This lack of a linear progression of ideas would present a challenge for anyone, not just those individuals listening in their second language.”

Trump’s mistaken shared context means he has a tendency to assume his listeners understand what he’s saying exactly as he means it, and he then makes gestures or provides visual cues to enforce that meaning. But for learners at all stages, that can be confusing—like someone shaking their head no as they’re saying “yes.”

The limitations of Trump’s speech have a somewhat hidden benefit: They can show non-native English speakers just how little fluency they need to make it in America. Henk Wolf, member of the Facebook group Omniglot Fan Club and a native Dutch and Frisian speaker, considers that an advantage. “It helps me get used to a register of American English I do not encounter all that often,” he says. "Use and knowledge of formal language is apparently not a necessity to reach the top of the political pyramid in the New World.”

## 4

How to learn any language in six months | Chris Lonsdale | TEDxLingnanUniversity

Transcriber: TED Translators admin Reviewer: Allam Zedan

The people in the back, can you hear me clearly?

OK, good.

Have you ever held a question in mind

for so long that it becomes part of how you think?

Maybe even part of who you are as a person?

Well I've had a question in my mind for many, many years and that is: How can you speed up learning? Now, this is an interesting question

because if you speed up learning,

you can spend less time at school.

And if you learn really fast,

you probably wouldn't have to go to school at all. Now, when I was young, school was sort of OK but... I found quite often that school got in the way of learning so I had this question in mind: How do you learn faster? And this began when I was very, very young, when I was 11 years old,

I wrote a letter to researchers in the Soviet Union, asking about hypnopaedia, this is sleep-learning,

where you get a tape recorder, you put it beside your bed and it turns on in the middle of the night when you're sleeping,

and you're supposed to be learning from this. A good idea, unfortunately it doesn't work. But, hypnopaedia did open the doors to research in other areas and we've had incredible discoveries about learning that began with that first question. I went on from there to become passionate about psychology and I have been involved in psychology in many different ways

for the rest of my life up until this point. In 1981, I took myself to China

and I decided that I was going to be native level in Chinese inside two years. Now, you need to understand that in 1981, everybody thought Chinese was really, really difficult

and that a Westerner could study for 10 years or more and never really get very good at it.

And I also went in with a different idea

which was: taking all of the conclusions

from psychological research up to that point and applying them to the learning process. What was really cool was that in six months I was fluent in Mandarin Chinese and it took a little bit longer to get up to native. But I looked around and I saw all of these people from different countries struggling terribly with Chinese,

I saw Chinese people struggling terribly to learn English and other languages, and so my question got refined down to:

How can you help a normal adult

learn a new language quickly, easily and effectively? Now this is a really, really important question in today's world. We have massive challenges with environment, we have massive challenges with social dislocation, with wars, all sorts of things going on

and if we can't communicate,

we're really going to have difficulty solving these problems. So we need to be able to speak each other's languages, this is really, really important.

The question then is: How do you do that?

Well, it's actually really easy.

You look around for people who can already do it, you look for situations where it's already working and then you identify the principles and apply them.

It's called modelling and I've been looking at language learning and modelling language learning for about 15 to 20 years now. And my conclusion, my observation from this is that any adult can learn a second language to fluency inside six months. Now when I say this, most people think I'm crazy, this is not possible. So let me remind everybody of the history of human progress, it's all about expanding our limits.

In 1950, everybody believed that running one mile in four minutes was impossible, and then Roger Bannister did it in 1956

and from there it's got shorter and shorter. 100 years ago everybody believed that heavy stuff doesn't fly. Except it does and we all know this.

How does heavy stuff fly?

We reorganise the material using principles that we have learned from observing nature, birds in this case.

And today we've gone even further...

We've gone even further, so you can fly a car. You can buy one of these for a couple 100.000 US dollars. We now have cars in the world that fly.

And there's a different way to fly which we've learned from squirrels. So all you need to do is copy what a flying squirrel does, build a suit called a wing suit and off you go, you can fly like a squirrel. Now most people, a lot of people, I wouldn't say everybody but a lot of people think they can't draw.

However there are some key principles, five principles, that you can apply to learning to draw and you can actually learn to draw in five days. So, if you draw like this, you learn these principles for five days and apply them and after five days you can draw something like this. Now I know this is true because that was my first drawing and after five days of applying these principles that was what I was able to do. And I looked at this and I went:

"Wow, so that's how I look like when I'm concentrating so intensely that my brain is exploding."

So, anybody can learn to draw in five days

and in the same way, with the same logic,

anybody can learn a second language in six months.

How? There are five principles and seven actions.

There may be a few more but these are absolutely core. And before I get into those I just want to talk about two myths, I want to dispel two myths.

The first is that you need talent.

Let me tell you about Zoe.

Zoe came from Australia, went to Holland, was trying to learn Dutch, struggling extremely, extremely... a great deal and finally people were saying: "You're completely useless," "you're not talented," "give up," "you're a waste of time" and she was very, very depressed.

And then she came across these five principles, she moved to Brazil and she applied them

and in six months she was fluent in Portuguese, so talent doesn't matter.

People also think that immersion in a new country is the way to learn a language. But look around Hong Kong, look at all the westerners who've been here for 10 years, who don't speak a word of Chinese. Look at all the Chinese living in America, Britain, Australia, Canada have been there 10, 20 years and they don't speak any English. Immersion per se does not work.

Why? Because a drowning man cannot learn to swim. When you don't speak a language, you're like a baby. And if you drop yourself into a context

which is all adults talking about stuff over your head, you won't learn. So, what are the five principles that you need to pay attention to? First: the four words,

attention, meaning, relevance and memory,

and these interconnect in very, very important ways. Especially when you're talking about learning. Come with me on a journey through a forest. You go on a walk through a forest

and you see something like this... Little marks on a tree, maybe you pay attention, maybe you don't.

You go another 50 metres and you see this... You should be paying attention.

Another 50 metres, if you haven't been paying attention, you see this... And at this point, you're paying attention.

And you've just learned that this... is important,

it's relevant because it means this, and anything that is related, any information related to your survival is stuff that you're going to pay attention to

and therefore you're going to remember it.

If it's related to your personal goals,

then you're going to pay attention to it.

If it's relevant, you're going to remember it. So, the first rule, first principle for learning a language is focus on language content that is relevant to you. Which brings us to tools.

We master tools by using tools and we learn tools the fastest when they are relevant to us.

So let me share a story.

A keyboard is a tool.

Typing Chinese a certain way, there are methods for this. That's a tool. I had a colleague many years ago

who went to night school; Tuesday night, Thursday night, two hours each time, practicing at home,

she spent nine months, and she did not learn to type Chinese. And one night we had a crisis.

We had 48 hours to deliver a training manual in Chinese. And she got the job, and I can guarantee you in 48 hours, she learned to type Chinese

because it was relevant, it was meaningful, it was important,

she was using a tool to create value.

So the second principle for learning a language is to use your language as a tool to communicate right from day one. As a kid does.

When I first arrived in China, I didn't speak a word of Chinese, and on my second week, I got to take a train ride overnight. I spent eight hours sitting in the dining car talking to one of the guards on the train,

he took an interest in me for some reason,

and we just chatted all night in Chinese

and he was drawing pictures and making movements with his hands and facial expressions and piece by piece by piece I understood more and more.

But what was really cool, was two weeks later, when people were talking Chinese around me, I was understanding some of this

and I hadn't even made any effort to learn that. What had happened, I'd absorbed it that night on the train, which brings us to the third principle.

When you first understand the message,

then you will acquire the language unconsciously. And this is really, really well documented now, it's something called comprehensible input. There's 20 or 30 years of research on this, Stephen Krashen, a leader in the field,

has published all sorts of these different studies and this is just from one of them.

The purple bars show the scores on different tests for language. The purple people were people who had learned by grammar and formal study, the green ones are the ones who learned by comprehensible input. So, comprehension works. Comprehension is key and language learning is not about accumulating lots of knowledge. In many, many ways it's about physiological training. A woman I know from Taiwan did great in English at school, she got A grades all the way through,

went through college, A grades, went to the US and found she couldn't understand what people were saying. And people started asking her: "Are you deaf?" And she was. English deaf.

Because we have filters in our brain that filter in the sounds that we are familiar with

and they filter out the sounds of languages that we're not. And if you can't hear it, you won't understand it, if you can't understand it, you're not going to learn it. So you actually have to be able to hear these sounds. And there are ways to do that but it's physiological training. Speaking takes muscle.

You've got 43 muscles in your face,

you have to coordinate those in a way

that you make sounds that other people will understand. If you've ever done a new sport for a couple of days, and you know how your body feels? Hurts?

If your face is hurting, you're doing it right. And the final principle is state. Psycho-physiological state. If you're sad, angry, worried, upset, you're not going to learn. Period. If you're happy, relaxed, in an Alpha brain state, curious, you're going to learn really quickly,

and very specifically you need to be tolerant of ambiguity.

If you're one of those people who needs to understand 100 percent every word you're hearing, you will go nuts, because you'll be incredibly upset all the time, because you're not perfect. If you're comfortable with getting some, not getting some, just paying attention to what you do understand, you're going to be fine, relaxed, and you'll be learning quickly.

So based on those five principles, what are the seven actions that you take? Number one: Listen a lot.

I call it brain soaking.

You put yourself in a context

where you're hearing tons and tons and tons of a language and it doesn't matter if you understand it or not. You're listening to the rhythms, to patterns that repeat, you're listening to things that stand out.

(Chinese) Pào nǎozi.

(English) So, just soak your brain in this.

The second action is that you get the meaning first, even before you get the words.

You go: "Well how do I do that? I don't know the words!" Well, you understand what these different postures mean. Human communication is body language in many, many ways, so much body language. From body language you can understand a lot of communication, therefore, you're understanding, you're acquiring through comprehensible input. And you can also use patterns that you already know. If you're a Chinese speaker of Mandarin and Cantonese and you go to Vietnam, you will understand 60 percent of what they say to you in daily conversation, because Vietnamese is about 30 percent Mandarin, 30 percent Cantonese. The third action: Start mixing.

You probably have never thought of this

but if you've got 10 verbs, 10 nouns and 10 adjectives, you can say 1000 different things.

Language is a creative process.

What do babies do? OK, "me", "bath", "now". OK, that's how they communicate.

So start mixing, get creative, have fun with it, it doesn't have to be perfect, just has to work. And when you're doing this, you focus on the core. What does that mean?

Well, any language is high frequency content. In English 1000 words covers 85 percent

of anything you're ever going to say in daily communication. 3000 words gives you 98 percent

of anything you're going to say in daily conversation.

You got 3000 words, you're speaking the language. The rest is icing on the cake.

And when you're just beginning with a new language, start with your tool box. Week number one,

in your new language you say things like:

"How do you say that?" "I don't understand,"

"repeat that please," "what does that mean?" all in your target language.

You're using it as a tool, making it useful to you, it's relevant to learn other things about the language. By week two, you should be saying things like:

"me," "this," "you," "that," "give," you know, "hot," simple pronouns, simple nouns, simple verbs, simple adjectives, communicating like a baby. And by the third or fourth week, you're getting into "glue words." "Although," "but," "therefore," these are logical transformers that tie bits of a language together, allowing you to make more complex meaning. At that point you're talking.

And when you're doing that, you should get yourself a language parent. If you look at how children and parents interact, you'll understand what this means.

When a child is speaking, it'll be using simple words, simple combinations, sometimes quite strange, sometimes very strange pronunciation, other people from outside the family don't understand it. But the parents do.

And so the kid has a safe environment, gets confidence. The parents talk to the children with body language and with simple language they know the child understands. So you have a comprehensible input environment that's safe, we know it works; otherwise none of you would speak your mother tongue. So you get yourself a language parent,

who's somebody interested in you as a person who will communicate with you essentially as an equal, but pay attention to help you understand the message. There are four rules of a language parent.

Spouses are not very good at this, OK?

But the four rules are,

first of all, they will work hard to understand what you mean even when you're way off beat.

Secondly, they will never correct your mistakes. Thirdly, they will feed back their understanding of what you are saying so that you can respond appropriately and get that feedback and then they will use words that you know. The sixth thing you have to do, is copy the face. You got to get the muscles working right,

so you can sound in a way that people will understand you. There's a couple of things you do.

One is that you hear how it feels, and feel how it sounds which means you have a feedback loop operating in your face, but ideally if you can look at a native speaker and just observe how they use their face, let your unconscious mind absorb the rules, then you're going to be able to pick it up. And if you can't get a native speaker to look at, you can use stuff like this... (Female voice) Sing, song, king, stung, hung. (Chris Lonsdale) And the final idea here, the final action you need to take is something that I call "direct connect".

What does this mean? Well most people learning a second language sort of take the mother tongue words and the target words and go over them again and again in their mind to try and remember them. Really inefficient. What you need to do is realise that

everything you know is an image inside your mind, it's feelings, if you talk about fire, you can smell the smoke, you can hear the crackling, you can see the flames, so what you do, is you go into that imagery and all of that memory and you come out with another pathway. So I call it "same box, different path". You come out of that pathway and you build it over time, you become more and more skilled at just connecting the new sounds to those images that you already have, into that internal representation. And over time you even become naturally good at that process, that becomes unconscious.

So, there are five principles that you need to work with, seven actions, if you do any of them, you're going to improve. And remember these are things under your control as the learner. Do them all and you're going to be fluent in a second language in six months. Thank you.

(Applause)

## 5

2024年上半年财政收支情况

一、全国一般公共预算收支情况

（一）一般公共预算收入情况。 

上半年，全国一般公共预算收入115913亿元，同比下降2.8%，扣除去年同期中小微企业缓税入库抬高基数、去年年中出台的减税政策翘尾减收等特殊因素影响后，可比增长1.5%左右。 

分中央和地方看，上半年，中央一般公共预算收入50011亿元，同比下降7.2%；地方一般公共预算本级收入65902亿元，同比增长0.9%。分税收和非税收入看，上半年，全国税收收入94080亿元，同比下降5.6%；非税收入21833亿元，同比增长11.7%。 

主要税收收入项目情况如下： 

1.国内增值税35400亿元，同比下降5.6%。 

2.国内消费税8834亿元，同比增长6.8%。 

3.企业所得税25384亿元，同比下降5.5%。 

4.个人所得税7358亿元，同比下降5.7%。 

5.进口货物增值税、消费税9297亿元，同比增长0.7%。关税1185亿元，同比下降5.2%。 

6.出口退税11380亿元，同比增长14.4%。 

7.城市维护建设税2560亿元，同比下降6.7%。 

8.车辆购置税1253亿元，同比下降5.4%。 

9.印花税1632亿元，同比下降22.9%。其中，证券交易印花税509亿元，同比下降54%。 

10.资源税1474亿元，同比下降11%。 

11.土地和房地产相关税收中，契税2779亿元，同比下降10.9%；房产税2337亿元，同比增长20.1%；城镇土地使用税1298亿元，同比增长11%；土地增值税3074亿元，同比下降4.3%；耕地占用税840亿元，同比增长22.6%。 

12.环境保护税121亿元，同比增长18%。 

13.车船税、船舶吨税、烟叶税等其他各项税收收入合计634亿元，同比增长3.4%。 

（二）一般公共预算支出情况。 

上半年，全国一般公共预算支出136571亿元，同比增长2%。分中央和地方看，中央一般公共预算本级支出18267亿元，同比增长9.6%；地方一般公共预算支出118304亿元，同比增长0.9%。 

主要支出科目情况如下： 

1.教育支出20291亿元，同比增长0.6%。 

2.科学技术支出4388亿元，同比下降1.4%。 

3.文化旅游体育与传媒支出1655亿元，同比增长0.7%。 

4.社会保障和就业支出22697亿元，同比增长4.2%。 

5.卫生健康支出10580亿元，同比下降12.1%。 

6.节能环保支出2413亿元，同比增长0.6%。 

7.城乡社区支出10472亿元，同比增长8%。 

8.农林水支出11528亿元，同比增长6.8%。 

9.交通运输支出5797亿元，同比下降1.5%。 

10.债务付息支出6304亿元，同比增长6.5%。 

二、全国政府性基金预算收支情况 

（一）政府性基金预算收入情况。 

上半年，全国政府性基金预算收入19915亿元，同比下降15.3%。分中央和地方看，中央政府性基金预算收入2073亿元，同比增长8.4%；地方政府性基金预算本级收入17842亿元，同比下降17.4%，其中，国有土地使用权出让收入15263亿元，同比下降18.3%。 

（二）政府性基金预算支出情况。 

上半年，全国政府性基金预算支出35599亿元，同比下降17.6%。分中央和地方看，中央政府性基金预算本级支出872亿元，同比增长16.5%；地方政府性基金预算支出34727亿元，同比下降18.2%，其中，国有土地使用权出让收入相关支出22000亿元，同比下降9.2%。 

发布日期：2024年07月22日

## 6

The brain-changing benefits of exercise | Wendy Suzuki

What if I told you there was something that you can do right now that would have an immediate, positive benefit for your brain, including your mood and your focus? And what if I told you that same thing could actually last a long time and protect your brain from different conditions like depression, Alzheimer's disease or dementia. Would you do it?

Yes! I am talking about the powerful effects of physical activity. Simply moving your body has immediate, long-lasting and protective benefits for your brain. And that can last for the rest of your life.

So, what I want to do today is tell you a story about how I used my deep understanding of neuroscience, as a professor of neuroscience, to essentially do an experiment on myself in which I discovered the science underlying why exercise is the most transformative thing that you can do for your brain today.

Now, as a neuroscientist (神经学家), I know that our brains, that is the thing in our head right now, that is the most complex structure known to humankind. But it's one thing to talk about the brain, and it's another to see it. So here is a real preserved human brain. And it's going to illustrate two key areas that we are going to talk about today.

The first is the prefrontal cortex (前额皮质), right behind your forehead, critical for things like decision-making, focus, attention and your personality. The second key area is located in the temporal lobe (颞叶), shown right here. You have two temporal lobes in your brain, the right and the left, and deep in the temporal lobe is a key structure critical for your ability to form and retain new long-term memories for facts and events. And that structure is called the hippocampus (海马体).

So, I've always been fascinated with the hippocampus. How could it be that an event that lasts just a moment, say, your first kiss, or the moment your first child was born, can form a memory that has changed your brain, that lasts an entire lifetime? That's what I want to understand.

I wanted to start and record the activity of individual brain cells in the hippocampus as subjects were forming new memories. And essentially try and decode how those brief bursts of electrical activity, which is how neurons (神经元) communicate with each other, how those brief bursts either allowed us to form a new memory, or did not.

But a few years ago, I did something very unusual in science. As a full professor of neural science, I decided to completely switch my research program. Because I encountered something that was so amazing, with the potential to change so many lives that I had to study it. I discovered and I experienced the brain-changing effects of exercise. And I did it in a completely inadvertent (无意的) way.

I was actually at the height of all the memory work that I was doing -- data was pouring in, I was becoming known in my field for all of this memory work. And it should have been going great. It was, scientifically. But when I stuck my head out of my lab door, I noticed something. I had no social life. I spent too much time listening to those brain cells in a dark room, by myself. I didn't move my body at all. I had gained 25 pounds. And actually, it took me many years to realize it, I was actually miserable.

And I shouldn't be miserable. And I went on a river-rafting trip -- by myself, because I had no social life. And I came back thinking, "Oh, my God, I was the weakest person on that trip." And I came back with a mission. I said, "I'm never going to feel like the weakest person on a river-rafting trip again." And that's what made me go to the gym.

And I focused my type-A personality on going to all the exercise classes at the gym. I tried everything. I went to kickbox, dance, yoga, step class, and at first it was really hard. But what I noticed is that after every sweat-inducing (出汗的) workout that I tried, I had this great mood boost and this great energy boost. And that's what kept me going back to the gym.

Well, I started feeling stronger. I started feeling better, I even lost that 25 pounds. And now, fast-forward a year and a half into this regular exercise program and I noticed something that really made me sit up and take notice. I was sitting at my desk, writing a research grant, and a thought went through my mind that had never gone through my mind before. And that thought was, "Gee, grant-writing is going well today."

And all the scientists always laugh when I say that, because grant-writing never goes well. It is so hard; you're always pulling your hair out, trying to come up with that million-dollar-winning idea. But I realized that the grant-writing was going well, because I was able to focus and maintain my attention for longer than I had before. And my long-term memory -- what I was studying in my own lab -- seemed to be better in me.

And that's when I put it together. Maybe all that exercise that I had included and added to my life was changing my brain. Maybe I did an experiment on myself without even knowing it.

So, as a curious neuroscientist, I went to the literature to see what I could find about what we knew about the effects of exercise on the brain. And what I found was an exciting and a growing literature that was essentially showing everything that I noticed in myself. Better mood, better energy, better memory, better attention. And the more I learned, the more I realized how powerful exercise was. Which eventually led me to the big decision to completely shift my research focus.

And so now, after several years of really focusing on this question, I've come to the following conclusion: that exercise is the most transformative thing that you can do for your brain today for the following three reasons.

Number one: it has immediate effects on your brain. A single workout that you do will immediately increase levels of neurotransmitters (神经递质) like dopamine, serotonin and noradrenaline. That is going to increase your mood right after that workout, exactly what I was feeling. My lab showed that a single workout can improve your ability to shift and focus attention, and that focus improvement will last for at least two hours. And finally, studies have shown that a single workout will improve your reaction times which basically means that you are going to be faster at catching that cup of Starbucks that falls off the counter, which is very, very important.

But these immediate effects are transient, they help you right after. What you have to do is do what I did, that is change your exercise regime, increase your cardiorespiratory (心肺的) function, to get the long-lasting effects. And these effects are long-lasting because exercise actually changes the brain's anatomy, physiology and function.

Let's start with my favorite brain area, the hippocampus. The hippocampus -- or exercise actually produces brand new brain cells, new brain cells in the hippocampus, that actually increase its volume, as well as improve your long-term memory, OK? And that including in you and me.

Number two: the most common finding in neuroscience studies, looking at effects of long-term exercise, is improved attention function dependent on your prefrontal cortex. You not only get better focus and attention, but the volume of the hippocampus increases as well.

And finally, you not only get immediate effects of mood with exercise but those last for a long time. So you get long-lasting increases in those good mood neurotransmitters.

But really, the most transformative thing that exercise will do is its protective effects on your brain. Here you can think about the brain like a muscle. The more you're working out, the bigger and stronger your hippocampus and prefrontal cortex gets. Why is that important? Because the prefrontal cortex and the hippocampus are the two areas that are most susceptible (易受影响的) to neurodegenerative diseases and normal cognitive decline in aging. So with increased exercise over your lifetime, you're not going to cure dementia or Alzheimer's disease, but what you're going to do is you're going to create the strongest, biggest hippocampus and prefrontal cortex so it takes longer for these diseases to actually have an effect.

You can think of exercise, therefore, as a supercharged 401K for your brain, OK? And it's even better, because it's free.

So, this is the point in the talk where everybody says, "That sounds so interesting, Wendy, but I really will only want to know one thing. And that is, just tell me the minimum amount of exercise I need to get all these changes."

And so I'm going to tell you the answer to that question. First, good news: you don't have to become a triathlete (铁人三项运动员) to get these effects. The rule of thumb is you want to get three to four times a week exercise minimum 30 minutes an exercise session, and you want to get aerobic exercise in. That is, get your heart rate up. And the good news is, you don't have to go to the gym to get a very expensive gym membership. Add an extra walk around the block in your power walk. You see stairs -- take stairs. And power-vacuuming can be as good as the aerobics class that you were going to take at the gym.

So, I've gone from memory pioneer to exercise explorer. From going into the innermost workings of the brain, to trying to understand how exercise can improve our brain function, and my goal in my lab right now is to go beyond that rule of thumb that I just gave you -- three to four times a week, 30 minutes. I want to understand the optimum exercise prescription for you, at your age, at your fitness level, for your genetic background, to maximize the effects of exercise today and also to improve your brain and protect your brain the best for the rest of your life.

But it's one thing to talk about exercise, and it's another to do it. So I'm going to invoke my power as a certified exercise instructor, to ask you all to stand up.

We're going to do just one minute of exercise. It's call-and-response, just do what I do, say what I say, and make sure you don't punch your neighbor, OK?

Music!

(Upbeat music)

Five, six, seven, eight, it's right, left, right, left. And I say, I am strong now. Let's hear you.

Audience: I am strong now.

Wendy Suzuki: Ladies, I am Wonder Woman-strong. Let's hear you!

Audience: I am Wonder Woman-strong.

WS: New move -- uppercut (上勾拳), right and left. I am inspired now. You say it!

Audience: I am inspired now.

WS: Last move -- pull it down, right and left, right and left. I say, I am on fire now! You say it.

Audience: I am on fire now.

WS: And done! OK, good job!

Thank you.

I want to leave you with one last thought. And that is, bringing exercise in your life will not only give you a happier, more protective life today, but it will protect your brain from incurable diseases. And in this way it will change the trajectory (轨迹) of your life for the better.

Thank you very much.

Thank you.

